	Elders always instruct you to get out of the home to interact with relatives and others and play outdoor games but not to spend time continuously with television, phone and internet Lets Think Why the children of your age are instructed same in each home? Our lifestyle has been changed to some extent in this age of technology. Each person is busy with own daily routine work and favorite job only. How much is it scientifically correct? Earlier, we have studied the importance of physical health, cleanliness and staying healthy. However, the concept of health does not end with it only.
	Classify your classmates into following groups depending upon the observation for a week. 1. Highly interactive. 2. Occasionally interactive. 3. Non-interactive Factors affecting the social health Make a list of the friends of each of the above three group members and also mention the group to which you belong. Social health
	Out of the various aspects of social health, we thought about only one in the above mentioned activity. Social health is the ability of a person to establish relationship with other persons. Ability to change one’s own behavior according to changing social conditions is an important characteristic of social health. Various factors like strong personality, having large number of friends and relatives, proper use of time during loneliness and with peer-group, trust in others, respect and acceptance for others are important for good social health. We have seen that various factors affect the social health.
	Factors disturbing the social health 
	Mental Stress Competition has increased in opportunities for education, employment and business due to increase in population. Children are facing the problems of loneliness and mental stress due to reasons like nuclear family and parents staying outdoors due to job. 9.2 Mental Stress There are many bindings on girls and excessive freedom for boys in some families. Boys enjoy the concession from their domestic duties where as girls have compulsion for the same on the pretext that ‘should be used to it’. Do you see the advertisements about increasing awareness on avoiding the discrimination between girls and boys or sister and brother in same family on choice for fresh/left-over food, learning medium? In society too, adolescent girls have to unnecessarily face the problems like teasing and molestation. Girls are facing the problem of stress due to such gender inequality. Now a days, everyone has to face the stress due to ever increasing disorder, crime and violence. At the same time, people looking at this as ‘fast and easy way of making money’ may become scapegoats and become part of such system. This is the deadly effect of social illness.
	Addiction Peer-group influence is stronger in case of adolescents. Adolescents always prefer the company of friends and follow their good or bad habits instead of following advice of parents and teachers. Children in their early age try upon tobacco, cigarette, gutkha, alcoholic drinks, drugs, etc. due to either peer- -group pressure or symbol of high standard living or as an imitation of elders. However, it may lead to addiction to such deadly substances. Temporarily intoxicating drugs of plant origin and some chemicals may permanently damage the human nervous system, muscle system, heart, etc. Earlier, we have studied the carcinogenic effect of tobacco containing substances on mouth and lungs.
	Incurable disease Factors like ignorance towards the people with incurable diseases like AIDS, T. B., leprosy and mental disorders as well as old persons leads to increase in old age homes and such factors also may cause harm to social health.
	Have you ever seen the persons inebriated with drugs or liquor loitering on dirty places? Whether such a pitiful condition of most intelligent human being is acceptable? You must have read the news about many deaths due to poisonous liquor. Why does it happen? Liquor is produced from alcohol obtained through fermentation of substances. However, if this process is performed in a wrong way, poisonous liquor is produced and proves fatal for many at a time. Efficiency of nervous system (especially brain) and liver as well as lifespan of person decreases due to alcoholism. Brain development in adolescents is hindered due to alcoholism and thereby ability of memorization and learning becomes slow. Addictive person cannot think rationally. Due to this, the person has to face the social, mental and familial illness along with physical illness.
	Now a days, excessive, unnecessary and irrational use of modern technology and communication media is becoming a sensitive issue through the view point of social health. Persons spending the time with cell phones for several hours are usually unaware of the surrounding. This is also a sort of addiction and leading to endangering of the social health. Various physical problems like tiredness, headache, insomnia, forgetfulness, tinnitus, joint pains and problems in vision may arise due to radiation of cell phones. More serious fact is those radiations penetrate the bones of children more effectively than the bones of adults. Persons continuously using the computers and internet become solitary. They cannot establish harmonious relations with relatives and other members of the society. Habitually, they become self-centered and thereby they may develop problems like autism and selfishness. They become less sensitive towards others. Chronic effect of such tendency is that they are not ready to help others in need and he nce they also do not get it in need.
	Children who watch the cartoon films may imitate the characters of those films. Tendency and behavior of the children who play the games like virtual war and car races (especially deliberately brought about virtual accidents in games) gradually become negative. Some games available on cell phones and computers are extremely time-consuming and also cause economic losses, to lose concentration on some essential subjects and may also prove fatal. Along with some useful purpose, huge information available on internet is used for viewing some inappropriate videos too. However, there is a governmental regulation over such media. Website, movies and cartoon films inappropriate for children are banned by the government.
	Why is there increase in news of death by drowning in ocean, falling in deep valleys or under trains during catching the cell phone selfie? There is increasing competition to upload the videos of road accidents instead of helping the victims. What is the mentality of such people? Why are the video-clips of parents threatening or hitting the children not studying as per their wish or domestic helpers beating the children are very common on social media nowadays?105 Internet My Friend Visit the website www.cyberswachhtakendra.gov.in 9.9 Cheating of Consumers 9.8 Pedestrian making a video-clip of the accident scene Person indulging in such destructive and unnatural activities is usually under stress and such activities are bursting of stress. Medical science has declared such activities as mental illness. Person indulging in selfie is not aware about the world around and the risks. This is called as selfiecide. Persons indulging in domestic violence, sending messages to others before committing suicide or those who send the video clips of suicidal act are mentally ill and they do so to win the sympathy. Cyber crimes t Banks continuously spread the message on mobile phones about not to disclose the aadhar / PAN / credit card / debit card number and other personal information if demanded by any person. t Do not disclose your PIN to anyone while withdrawing cash from ATM machine or purchasing through card payment. Why such instructions are given? t Consumers are deceived by showing superior items on websites but actually selling the items of either inferior quality or impaired ones. t Bank transactions are done using PIN without the knowledge of consumers. t Confidential information about government, institutes and companies is obtained from internet with the help of computer programs or other ideas and misused. This is called as hacking of information. t Nowadays, crimes like opening a fake account on Facebook and displaying false information and thereby teasing the girls or exploiting them financially. t Misuse or illegal sale of the written literature, software, photos, videos, music, etc. of others by obtaining from internet is called as piracy. Hence, make the constructive use of communication media like television, phone, and internet for essential needs and entertainment only but do not go into the clutches by spending hours with those media.
	Cyber crimes t Banks continuously spread the message on mobile phones about not to disclose the aadhar / PAN / credit card / debit card number and other personal information if demanded by any person. t Do not disclose your PIN to anyone while withdrawing cash from ATM machine or purchasing through card payment. Why such instructions are given? t Consumers are deceived by showing superior items on websites but actually selling the items of either inferior quality or impaired ones. t Bank transactions are done using PIN without the knowledge of consumers. t Confidential information about government, institutes and companies is obtained from internet with the help of computer programs or other ideas and misused. This is called as hacking of information. t Nowadays, crimes like opening a fake account on Facebook and displaying false information and thereby teasing the girls or exploiting them financially. t Misuse or illegal sale of the written literature, software, photos, videos, music, etc. of others by obtaining from internet is called as piracy.Electronic media is also misused by sending derogatory messages, spreading vulgar pictures and inflammatory statements. t Exchange of information through media like email, Facebook and Whatsapp occurs very fast. However, our personal information and phone numbers are automatically spread and thereby reaches the unwanted persons which leads to malpractices like incoming of unnecessary messages. Some of such messages either impair of shut down the mobiles and computers. All the above mentioned incidences are examples of cyber crime. Committing such crimes is also a mental illness. Later on, the criminal also has to face the mental stress. ‘Cyber crime unit’ has been newly launched in police department. Cyber crime experts collect the details, investigate the cyber crime and thereby find the criminal with the help of internet.
	IT Act-2000: This act has been enacted since 17th October 2000 and been amended in 2008. Person committing the cyber crime has to face the punishment like imprisonment for 3 years of fine up to 5 lakh. Maharashtra is at forefront in controlling the cybercrimes and it has been proved to be a first state to start a separate cyber crime unit.
	Stress management Have you seen the loudly laughing citizens in morning in public gardens? Name of this newly popularized concept is ‘laughter club’. These people relieve their mental stress by laughing loudly. Various ways of expression like establishing communication with friends, peers, cousins, teachers and more importantly parents, noting down our feelings, expressing our feeling with near and dear ones help us to relieve the stress. Fostering the hobbies like material collection, photography, reading, cooking, sculpturing, drawing, rangoli, dancing, etc. help us to properly utilize the free hours. By diverting the energy and mind towards the positive thinking, negative thoughts are automatically neutralized.
	Learning and listening to the music, singing keeps us happy and drives away the stress. Music has the power of changing the mindset. Importance of outdoor games is unparallel. There are various benefits of sports like it causes physical exercise, improves discipline, interaction and tendency of unity, loneliness is driven away and person becomes more social. Regular exercising, massaging, visiting the spa too help to relive the stress. Yoga is not limited for asanas and pranayam but it includes discipline, balanced and good food, and meditation also. Deep breathing, yogic sleep, yogasanas, etc. are good for health. Meditation helps to improve the ability of concentration. It imparts positivity in our temperament. Meditation helps the students to improve concentration in their studies. Deliberate inculcation of characters like time management, planning of our own duties and decision power is nothing but cultivating the socially strong and ideal personality. We have all the ways to manage our stress. However, if those are not successful due to certain reasons, it leads to some more serious problems like depression and frustration. Medical advice, counselling and psychotherapy are available for such persons. Similarly, many NGOs also provide helping hand. Let us see the information about some of those.
	1. Unified Movement against Tobacco. This movement has been started by 45 different well-known organizations like WHO, Tata trust, etc. This movement is active for controlling the tobacco consumption and providing guidance to activists against tobacco.
	2. Salaam Mumbai Foundation This organization runs programs in various schools in Mumbai to inpower the children living in slum area in the field of education, sports, arts and busines. This organization encourages the children to take education by helping them to improve their health and lifestyle. This trust has made some districts in Maharashtra completely tobacco-free through hard work. Since the year 2002 theis organiration is working with various school in urban and rural area for making the society tobacco-free. This programme is being implemented with the help of Government in about 200 schools in Mumbai and 14000 schools in the rest of Maharashtra. The oath of freedom from tobacco is taken in every school as per the Government letter.
	Government Schemes Phone number / helpline numbers are published in newspaper to help the children in distress or facing any type of problem. Children contact the helpline to narrate their problems. Proper help and guidelines are offered to children